# SportsTechWest the Analytics Translator

## The problem I am solving 

There is sometimes a divide between understanding the usage of tech and/or data among coach, player, trainer, and/or the front office of an organization.  WNBA All-Star Sue Bird said that when she was in Russia a team had her do exercises to determine how fast can draw circles during her physical exam.  To this day she still does not know what that was for and what they did with the information.  Sometimes no one explains to players why they are doing or learning certain things or why certain things are useful.  Sometimes players can be intimidated to ask questions.  A professional athlete feels like they are always being accessed so they always want to seem confident in their abilities. There are also times where a person is younger and they do not see the value in analytics.  Luis Scola spoke about this on a panel at MIT Sloan Sports Analytics conference, "I think I learned a lot from numbers.  The problem is that early in my career I was kind of like disregarding all that... You learn you learn different things and you evolve as a player.  Usually, it happens when your body doesn't react that well, you start to look at different things that can help you to continue to play at a high level and you start looking at other stuff, and at some point along that process, I got into numbers." 

Insert Rashad West who can help teams players understand why it is important and the reason they are doing certain things because he is a former professional basketball player but now spends his time developing technology and analyzing performance.  Ok, I am done talking about myself in 3rd person.  To be honest I am an individual who loves the nuances of basketball and player performance.  The player element of the game has been taken over by technology.  Everything is now determined by data and in the future every decision by coaches and front office will be determined by technology.  In order to understand where we are going let's go back to how it all started.  

If you have a moment I am about to take you on a journey.  Let's talk about the evolution of basketball.  The game started with a round ball that had stitching on it like a football and players would shoot the ball into a peach basket.  The game was mostly 5 players standing around passing each other the ball while standing in a stationary position and only moving without the ball.  The exception to this was if they were dribbling.  Dunking the ball was illegal and the game was segregated by race.

Let us fast forward to the modern-day where we factor in human evolution, technology, and data.  Now we have an integrated game and in some leagues, the players are making millions of dollars a year. They are moving fluently on the court and can dribble, pass, and shoot so well that often it looks effortless.  They can dribble the ball and jump pass or stop on the dime and shoot.  They can dunk the ball while doing pirouettes in the air.  Some players are so good they can now shoot floaters, runners, fadeaways, and hook shots depending on the defenders positioning.      

You have multiple players who are great in the NBA.  However, there are 4 that have stood out for revolutionizing the game over the past decade. 

One of them is almost 7 foot tall, lanky, silky smooth, point forward that could not lift 185 pounds one time at the combine but has basketball type core strength.  Next up is a 6'8 260-pound freight train, that moves like a ballerina, and can see the court like he has x-ray vision.  Thrid we have a 6'2ish 185 poundish point guard/shooting guard,
that can shot from outside of the arena and handle the ball with the precision of an Exacto knife.  Last but not least we have a guy who is 6'8 and wiry with hands that are bigger than both of your hands put together (unless you are Shaq) and you could not get around him in the game show "Gladiators" in the [Pyriamid](https://youtu.be/x5_ivBV7FMo) if your
life depended on it. 

If you do not know who these players are by my description you may know them by name.  In order, we have Kevin Durant, Lebron James, Stephen Curry, and Kwahi Lenoard.  So this is why I love this game.  Each player has their unique set of skill sets.  We are starting to be able to look at advanced metrics and find out the vitals that make these players special.  If you become skilled at a certain element you can become successful in the league.  Although all of these players are great scorers the analytics are starting to show how players are effective without being a "scorer".  

A great example of this is Dennis Rodman.  The Worm (a nickname given to him for how different he is) is a Hall of Famer in the game of basketball.  You would think since the game is about scoring more points than your opponent that he was a great scorer in his prime.  Well, you would be wrong!  The Worm was a tenacious defender and a relentless rebounder.  He would have games where he did
not score a point but still impacted the game in so many ways.  The intangible things players like Rodman used to do are now being measured in more ways than you could ever imagine.  Advanced metrics have taken the sports world by storm.  

Player performance is a key indicator of a team's performance.  The issue is that some teams are using it to their competitive advantage more than others.  One of the reasons for this is some teams do not know what is best for their circumstance or they do not know what data or tech should be implemented.  With more data and technology coming out all the time how does a team determine what would be best? The overall goal is to win a championship but how do you use the tech and metrics to accomplish that goal?

I would like to help teams figure out what technology and data to use depending on their unique circumstances.  I have a unique understanding of being a player and trainer at a high level and also the ability to decipher new technology. I am also in the process of learning how to decode data sets and algorithms.  

It will be fun to talk to more teams and organizations at the college and professional level about what I can bring to the table.  I want to find more players who could fit into a role like this as a consultant or in an official role with a team.  I think this niche should be explored and evaluated.

Basketball analytics are taking over the game and if a team is as worried about success as I think they should be, they should be loading up on secret weapons behind the scenes that will give them a competitive advantage.  
